[WIP] doc: net: Add OpenThread integration description (#1)
pszkotak/zephyr: doc/reference/networking/openthread_integration.rst

happen.

.. figure:: zephyr_netstack_openthread-rx_sequence.svg
    :alt: OpenThread Application RX data flow
    :figclass: align-center

    OpenThread Application RX data flow

Data receiving (RX) - TODO: expand, remove/rephrase copy/paste from the zephyrs RX page.
-------------------

1. A network data packet is received by a nRF5 IEEE 802.15.4 Radio Driver.

2. The device driver allocates enough network buffers to store the received
   data. The network packet is placed in the proper RX queue (implemented by
   :ref:`k_fifo <fifos_v2>`). By default there is only one receive queue in
   the system, but it is possible to have up to 8 receive queues.
   These queues will process incoming packets with different priority.
   See :ref:`traffic-class-support` for more details. The receive queues also
   act as a way to separate the data processing pipeline (bottom-half) as
   the device driver is running in an interrupt context and it must do its
   processing as fast as possible.

3. The 802154 RX Radio driver thread does the upper-half processing of the
   received IEEE 802.15.4 radio frame. As a result it puts a work item
   with the net_recv_data() to have the frame processed.

> 4. The work queue thread rx_workq calls the openthread_recv() which inserts

Reviewer: I think you should describe it more. something about going over registered handlers and consuming packets by openthread_recv if the packet type matches thread radio frame.

Author: Done

   the frame in the rx_pkt_fifo and returns the NET_OK.

5. The OpenThread thread gets a frame from the FIFO and consumes it.

>    It also handles IP header compression, reassembly of fragmented traffic.

Reviewer: Not sure if "being consumed" is here or 4 or maybe 6. Packet was removed from zephyr fifo in 4 by the recv function but it is still in use and will be freed after openthread_process.

Author: I agree. This is the only thing left to do here when it comes to obvious missing information.
I would like to mark places in which net_pkts are allocated and unreferenced.

.. _openthread_integration:

OpenThread Integration
######################

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 2

> Overview

Reviewer 2: Overview is meant to give an overview and introduce topics that will be discussed later in detail. But there is no mention of radio driver, threads, or traffic flow here. I suggest you get rid of Overview header and add more general information, so that these paragraphs sum up and introduce what comes later.

Author: Done.

********
The OpenThread stack is integrated with the Zephyr RTOS as the L2 layer.

> The main advantage of this approach is that it can utilize the Zephyr's L3 layer.

Reviewer 2: What does this access to L3 layer give?

Author: Done.

The drawback, on the other hand, lies in the reception path in which the IP packet
needs to traverse the OpenThread L3 layer and then Zephyr's L3 layer in order to 
reach the BSD socket.

Note that if one desires the application can use just the OpenThread API 
with it's IPv6 stack and even the internal CoAP implementation 

> which is the application protocol.

Reviewer 2: This "note that" (which should be a `.. note::` btw) raises some questions: How does this relate to the previous paragraph? What are the advantages and disadvantages of using the approach from this note?

Author: Done.

File system and shim layer
**************************

The OpenThread Network Stack is present in the following paths:
- OpenThread stack location: modules/lib/openthread/

> - OpenThread shim layer location: zephyr/subsys/net/lib/openthread/platform/

Reviewer 3: What about the files under: zephyr/subsys/net/l2/openthread/ ?

Author: Done.

> - OpenThread shim layer location: zephyr/subsys/net/lib/openthread/platform/

Reviewer 2: Please check Zephyr's Documentation Guidelines, as your document is not fully conformant.
Link: https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/zephyr/guides/documentation/index.html#doc-guidelines

Some issues spotted:
- lists need to be preceded by a blank line
- lists can be introduced with -, but * is more common
- steps need to be without blank lines in-between
- steps need only the number on the first step, then # should be used

Author: Done (at least I hope so).

> It's responsibilities include:

Reviewer 2: Does `it` refer to OpenThread network stack or file system and shim layer here? Please use the full noun phrase.

Author: Done.

- translating the data into the Zephyr's native net_pkt,
- providing openthread thread body and synchronization API,
- providinng openthread_send(), openthread_recv() calls which are registered as the L2 interface API,
- providing a way to initialize the OpenThread stack,
- implementing callback functions used by the OpenThread stack

> The nRF IEEE802.15.4 Radio Driver is present in the following paths:

Reviewer 2: Where does the 802.15.4 RD come from? There's no mention of it in the Overview section, and there is no hint at the role it fulfills here...

Author: Done.

- nRF IEEE802.15.4 Radio Driver shim layer location: zephyr/drivers/ieee802154/{ieee802154_nrf5.c/ieee802154_nrf5.h

> - nRF IEEE802.15.4 Radio Driver location: modules/hal/nordic/drivers/nrf_radio_802154

Reviewer: Note: If this document is part of zephyr it's ok. If it will be a part of NCS the location will change soon to somewhere in nrf/nrfx

Author: Yes, we plan to integrate it with our Zephyr fork and then upstream it as well.

The RX connection of the radio driver is done with the interrupt handler 
registered using the Zephyr's mechanism with the NRF_802154_INTERNAL_RADIO_IRQ_HANDLING=0 defined. 
The registered IRQ handler uses Zephyr's FIFO to pass the IEEE802.15.4 frame further.

> The 802154 thread runs on the highest cooperative priority and waits on this FIFO. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The 802.15.4 thread runs on the highest cooperative priority and waits for this FIFO. 
```

Author: Hmm. The point is that the name of the thread is precisely "802154 RX". Maybe I can put this in quotation marks?

Author: I will go with back quotes to follow guidelines.

> Once new frame apears it continues with the processing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once a new frame appears, it continues with the processing.
```

> The TX connection uses the workqueue which calls the radio driver calls to schedule the transmission.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The TX connection uses the workqueue, which calls the radio driver calls to schedule the transmission.
```
calls the calls?

Then the RTC IRQ is used to send the frame over the air.

Threads

> *******

Reviewer 2: The list below needs an introductory sentence.
Also, I suggest no blank lines between the list items, to keep conformance with Zephyr's doc guidelines.

And... is this a section of its own or a subsection of some previous section? Header formatting is all at the same level now, so I'm not sure.

Author: The Threads section is at the same level.
Done.

- openthread - responsible for receiving IEEE 802.15.4 frames during reception.

>   When the reassembled trafic turns out to be the IPv6 packet it calls the ot_receive_handler()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  When the reassembled traffic turns out to be the IPv6 packet, it calls the ot_receive_handler()
```

>   which injects it back to the L2 via the net_recv_data() so it could later reach the Zephyr's IP stack.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  which injects it back to the L2 via the net_recv_data(), so that it could later reach the Zephyr's IP stack.
```
I've got a bit lost with the `it`s in this sentence. There are 3 occurrences, and at some point the reference changes. I suggest you replace `it` with what they refer to, with some repetition, but repetition is good in English and technical docs.

>   During the transmission it's job is to handle the previously scheduled OpenThread Tasklet containig 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  During the transmission, its job is to handle the previously scheduled OpenThread Tasklet that contains
```
`its` vs `it's` is a very common typo, and a very serious one. This said, not sure what `it` refers to here...

  a message to be sent.

- rx_workq - responsible for receiving L2 frames and directing them either to the openthread process

>   or the Zephyr's IP stack during reception depening if it is the IEEE 802.15.4 frame

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  or the Zephyr's IP stack during reception, depending whether the frame is an IEEE 802.15.4 frame
```

>   or the IPv6 packet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  or an IPv6 packet.
```

- tx_workq - responsible for receiving UDP packet and scheduling the OpenThread Tasklet

>   for transmission and unlocking the openthread thread by giving the semaphore.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  for transmission and unlocking the OpenThread thread by giving the semaphore.
```

Author: The thread name is "openthread".

Author: Added double back quotes.

> - workqueue - responsible for invoking the radio driver API in order to schedule a transmission.

Reviewer: Not sure if this is about this object: ot_work_q. If yes, the "workqueue" is too generic name for it. If no, you are missing one thread:) The idea behind ot_work_q is to have a thread that can handle more time consuming tasks without blocking openthread main thread. If the main ot thread is blocked no timer event will be handled when it was scheduled and all timeouts will not work. Currently the only time consuming task is radio transmission as it does not have nonblocking implementation yet.

Author: I am pretty sure that the `workqueue` is precisely the thread name. I will take a look to confirm that and clarify what exact work item does it process. Let's not close this comment yet. Some improvements are definitely needed.

- 802154 RX - resposible for the "upper half" processing of the radio frame reception. 

>   Works on the objects of type nrf5_802154_rx_frame which are put to the nrf5_data.rx_fifo

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Works on the objects of type ``nrf5_802154_rx_frame`` which are put to the ``nrf5_data.rx_fifo``
```
Please make sure all code inline content is highlighted this way. More info: https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/zephyr/guides/documentation/index.html#content-highlighting

  from the RX IRQ context. Then it is responsible of creating the net_pkt structure
  and passing it the upper layer with the net_recv_data().

Traffic flow
************

> The traffic flow is not fully summetrical for the reception (RX) and the transmission (TX) cases.

Reviewer 3: typo summetrical -> symmetrical

Author: Done.

Each of these flows is described below in an appropriate section.

RX path

> *******

Reviewer 2: I guess this should be a subsection? Then it needs =====.
See https://developer.nordicsemi.com/nRF_Connect_SDK/doc/latest/zephyr/guides/documentation/index.html#headings

Author: Done.

An application typically consists of one or more :ref:`threads <threads_v2>`

> that execute the application logic. When using the
> :ref:`BSD socket API <bsd_sockets_interface>`, the following things will
> happen.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that execute the application logic.
The following figure shows what happens when you are using the :ref:`BSD socket API <bsd_sockets_interface>`.
```

.. figure:: zephyr_netstack_openthread-rx_sequence.svg
    :alt: OpenThread Application RX data flow
    :figclass: align-center

    OpenThread Application RX data flow

Data receiving (RX) - TODO: expand, remove/rephrase copy/paste from the zephyrs RX page.

> -------------------

Reviewer 2: Check headings please.

Author: Deleted it.

> 

Reviewer 2: These steps need an introductory sentence.
Also, are these steps or description of events?

Author: It's more like the event sequence order.

Author: Not sure how this should be clarified. These numbers correspond to numbers on svg diagrams. Leaving for now.

1. A network data packet is received by a nRF5 IEEE 802.15.4 Radio Driver.

2. The device driver allocates enough network buffers to store the received
   data. The network packet is placed in the proper RX queue (implemented by
   :ref:`k_fifo <fifos_v2>`). By default there is only one receive queue in
   the system, but it is possible to have up to 8 receive queues.
   These queues will process incoming packets with different priority.
   See :ref:`traffic-class-support` for more details. The receive queues also
   act as a way to separate the data processing pipeline (bottom-half) as
   the device driver is running in an interrupt context and it must do its

>    processing as fast as possible.

Reviewer 3: I would omit this copy/paste point (or additionally put reference to it: network_stack_architecture) and just indicate where actually the received packet is placed into RX queue. For our case it will be the radio driver callback `nrf_802154_received_timestamp_raw`.

Author: Done.

3. The 802154 RX Radio driver thread does the upper-half processing of the
   received IEEE 802.15.4 radio frame. As a result it puts a work item
   with the net_recv_data() to have the frame processed.

4. The work queue thread rx_workq calls the registered handler for every queued frame.
   In this case the registered handler openthread_recv() checks if the frame is of the 
   IEEE 802.15.4 type and if it is the case it insertd the frame in the rx_pkt_fifo and returns the NET_OK.

5. The OpenThread thread gets a frame from the FIFO and processes it.
   It also handles IP header compression, reassembly of fragmented traffic.

> 6. As soon as it detects a valid IPv6 packet that needs to be handled by the 

Reviewer 2: Unclear reference with `it` again. Please check the whole paragraph.

   higher layer it calls the registered callback ot_receive_handler()
   which creates a buffer for a net_pkt that is going to be passed to the Zephyr's IP stack
   and calls the net_recv_data() to have it processed.

7. This time the openthread_recv() called by the work queue returns NET_CONTINUE
   indicating that the valid IPv6 packet is present and needs to be processed by
   the Zephyr's higher layer.

8. The net_ipv6_input() passes the packet the next higher layer.

> 9. The packet is then passed to L3 processing. If the packet is IP based,

Reviewer: What is the difference between grayed-out and not grayed out boxes? Why IPv6 is while UDP is not grayed-out?

Author: In the RX diagram they are result of some issue I am struggling to fix.
The frame causes it, but I really want to have them grouped.

   then the L3 layer processes the IPv6.

> 10. A socket handler then finds an active socket to which the network packet

Reviewer 2: No need to use "then" and similar when using the step list.

Author: Done.

   belongs and puts it in a queue for that socket, in order to separate the
   networking code from the application. Typically the application is run in

>    userspace context and the network stack is run in kernel context.

Reviewer: I'm not sure anymore we should mention userspace here as we don't have thread app that separates userspace from kernelspace.

Author: Removed both from images as well.

11. The application will then receive the data and can process it as needed.
   The application should have used the
   :ref:`BSD socket API <bsd_sockets_interface>` to create a socket
   that will receive the data.

TX path

> *******

Reviewer 2: Heading issue (see above).

> .. figure:: zephyr_netstack_openthread-tx_sequence.svg

Reviewer: figure shall state Sending or Transmitting instead of Receiving (upper left corner)

Author: Good catch. Done.

    :alt: OpenThread Application TX data flow
    :figclass: align-center

    OpenThread Application TX data flow

> Data transmitting (TX)

Reviewer 2: Should this be a heading as well?

1. The application uses the
   :ref:`BSD socket API <bsd_sockets_interface>` when sending the data.
   However, direct interaction with the OpenThread API is possible - e.g.
   to utilize it's CoAP implementation.

2. The application data is prepared for sending to kernel space and then
   copied to internal net_buf structures.

> 3. Depending on the socket type, a protocol header is added in front of the

Reviewer: Is IPv6 not involved here (as is in RX)?

Author: It seems that the UDP is injected to the OT directly.

   data. For example, if the socket is a UDP socket, then a UDP header is
   constructed and placed in front of the data.

4. A UDP net_pkt is queued to be processed with the process_tx_packet().

>    In the call chain the openthread_send() is called wchich converts the

Reviewer: typo: which
- better than "witch" which I usually do.

Author: Done ;).
